So, last Thursday we had the confirmation
candidates here, and today we have the
first communicants and their parents.
We have young people and those who are
following via Laudato TV, and it's hard
to make a sermon that includes everyone.
Sun, are you ready?
Who gave you the rosary?
Church, but it's not a pastor. Great! Are
you excited about your first communion?
Have you learned any songs?
Some of you said yes, some no.
Okay, those who said yes,
let me hear which song it is.
Just the beginning, then start
singing, the group will support you.
How does the song go?
Bravo!
Great, well done.
Do you know, do you know, my dears,
what I am holding here in my hand?
That's right, the Bible,
the Holy Scripture.
And why did I bring the
Bible, the Holy Scripture?
Because someone gave birth to
you, raised you, and prepared
you for this holy communion.
And who is that?
Parents, that's right.
And now, in this second part, we will talk
a bit about parents, because here God has
written how they must take care of you.
Or did you know that?
Now listen to the sermon, and next
time they aren't good to you, tell
them, hey, the Holy Scripture says,
God said to raise us this way.
Did you remember that?
I'll open a quote here.
There are many schools, many
psychology and pedagogy experts who
talk about how you should be raised.
However, at one university,
they conducted a study.
This university is well-known at Harvard.
They took children like you and
followed them for years as they grew up.
They wanted to see what they
would be like when they grew up.
They invested a lot of money in this
study to see what these children became
and what they were like as adults.
And as the years went by, they tracked
their development just like your
parents track yours, and when they
grew up, they were quite mature,
responsible, diligent, and hardworking.
But the study revealed one
interesting thing: to become like
that, they all had similar parents.
And they noticed through that
study what the parents of
those children were applying.
They applied two things.
One is that they applied love.
And the other is something you might
like a bit less, which is... Discipline.
It's a word from the holy scripture, so
let's say a bit of order, discipline.
When you see this, you have monitors
here who ensure you don't talk or turn
around, that's called discipline when the
monitor says no, be quiet, or your other
parents who are watching over you here.
So, dear parents and children, remember,
in order for someone to grow up to be
good people and good believers, like these
young students you see here in front of
you and around you, two things are needed.
Love and discipline.
Dear parents, I believe it's not easy
for you to raise children, and there's
no manual that will tell you everything.
Nowhere did you go to school to learn how
to be parents and raise children, because
you just find yourself in that situation.
But if you want to avoid
mistakes, use these two things.
Now, I'm still holding this Bible.
Is everything just about being smart?
No.
Who among you can read well?
Come on, you here close by.
You'll read this out loud, see?
With the promise that it may
go well with you and that you
may live long on the earth.
And you, fathers, do not provoke your
children to anger, but bring them up in
the discipline and instruction of the
Lord, the duties of slaves and masters.
So maybe not everyone heard it
well, but it was read nicely.
The first part says that you
children should obey your parents.
And if you listened to your parents,
we wouldn't have any problems, right?
However, sometimes that freedom leads
us to stop listening, especially when
we grow up and become a bit rebellious
towards our parents, thinking, "What can
they tell me?" And there's the problem.
However, we are interested in this
fourth verse here, so you can remember
it at home, this was the Epistle to
the Ephesians, chapter six, verse four.
It refers a bit more to fathers,
but mothers can apply it too.
And it goes like this: And you
fathers, do not provoke your children
to anger, but bring them up in the
discipline and instruction of the Lord.
You see, we don't need universities and
surveys to know how to raise children.
The Holy Scripture already tells us.
However, in this sentence from
the fourth verse, did you hear it?
The first thing parents must not do.
Did you remember?
It says fathers must not
embitter their children.
Dear parents, one of the first things, and
it's true, is that there are parents who
can make their children's lives bitter.
There are parents who do not love.
For whom being a parent
feels like a heavy burden.
And if children do not experience love,
what the Holy Scripture talks about
happens, bitterness grows in their hearts.
Let's see in the Holy
Scripture how this comes about.
In the Book of Genesis,
we have two brothers.
Have you heard the story of Cain and Abel?
They had the same upbringing, yet one son
had a deep reverence for God while the
other was full of bitterness and anger, to
the point of wanting to kill his brother.
Oh, that's right.
But you see, you parents often apply the
same upbringing to all your children.
But that doesn't guarantee that
all your children will be the same.
You raise two, three, four kids the
same way, and they turn out different.
We see this in the Holy Scriptures.
Cain and Abel had the same upbringing.
One wanted to kill his brother,
the other respected God.
And you see, it shows how
important that love is.
To avoid creating bitterness.
And when do parents do that?
Let's look at an example from
the Holy Scripture again.
Why was Joseph sold into slavery?
Have you heard that story?
It's sad, isn't it?
He had many brothers and sisters,
and in the end, he was sold, right?
Tell me, sweetheart, say it into
the microphone so everyone can hear.
Because he was the most
loved, he was the most loved.
Was he perhaps the youngest?
Yes, he was the youngest son.
Who raised their hand?
Tell us, Sokla.
And why did his father love him the most?
Bravo!
When you parents create bitterness
in your children, when you choose a
favorite child, his father, as the
youngest son... Especially loved him.
He had the best suit made for him.
He separated him from his other brothers
and sisters because he was his favorite.
But what did that create
in the other children?
What does the Holy Scripture
say about all this?
Jealousy.
Jealousy, anger.
So you see, parents, how you can
make mistakes in raising children.
When you don't love all
your children equally.
And when you highlight one, praise
one, reward one, it's natural that it
will create bitterness in the other, as
the Holy Scripture writes about here.
And you fathers, do not
embitter your children.
And that's why the brothers decided
to sell Joseph and express, let's
say, their bitterness and anger
towards what their father had done.
Many times, dear parents,
you need to be careful.
I know some of you might think,
"What do you have to tell us? You are
priests, you don't have children,"
but many times, this is exactly
where bitterness forms in children.
There are parents who, as the
Holy Scripture says, don't pay
attention and can very easily make
their children's lives bitter.
It doesn't always have to be
with a gesture or a material
reward; it can also be with words.
What do we hear the most today?
We don't take these little suns seriously.
So we think, they're just kids.
Why should I praise them?
If you want to make their lives bitter,
don't be present in their lives, don't
have time for them, focus on other
things, don't be interested in how
they're doing in school, how they're
doing in church, and you will create
bitter individuals in the future.
That's why the scripture keeps
repeating and telling us, fathers
and mothers alike, to be careful.
First, what shouldn't we do?
We shouldn't embitter their lives.
Second, a woman once told me, you
know how everyone wraps gifts for
Christmas, related to this topic.
One mother, who had four children,
would always put the price on each gift.
Then one son asked, "Mom, why do
you always do that?" Because she
knew the list of all the gifts.
She said, "I don't want you to compete
among yourselves and say, 'I got a more
expensive gift.' I want you all to see the
price, that you all got the same, because
I love you all equally." So, mom and dad
should love all their children equally.
And you see how much care and love this
mother had, that she even highlighted
the price so that brother and sister or
brother and brother would never argue,
not be resentful, and not fall into
temptation like Joseph's brothers did.
Here, furthermore, this word
says... That one should raise with
discipline and admonition of the Lord.
What is the discipline and
admonition of the Lord?
So, it means to tell parents
that God was an excellent parent.
God led His chosen people
through the desert.
He cared for them, an
excellent parent without flaw.
Yet, they still didn't listen to Him.
But that same Father forgave
every time, loved every time,
showed tenderness every time, and
always waited for them to return.
That's what it means to raise
children with God's grace.
To be like God who forgives, who loves.
It's sad, dear parents, if your
children never see your tears.
If they don't see your concern for them.
If they don't see your phone
calls, your worry, that's sad.
We are afraid to show emotions, love,
and concern in front of our children.
They will appreciate it more when
they see your tears and concern
for them rather than coldness.
The problem is that they memorize
everything now, but what are we creating,
as that study suggests, what will they be
like in 5, 10, 20 years as grown adults?
Will they be men who are not afraid to
cry and show emotions, or will they be
icebergs who don't know how to deal with
their pain, while we all want change?
So, that's why we talk about this
upbringing and discipline like God who
raises us, because what's important?
It's not just important to give
children everything material.
That's why it is said here that we
need to care for their spiritual state.
But listen to this.
If you've read the Book of Genesis or
the beginnings of the Bible, when God
addresses Moses and wants to tell him
what to do, like a parent teaching
their people, He speaks to him about
His word, but first says this to Moses.
Let my word first be engraved in
your heart, and then teach others.
So parents, God's word, faith, must first
be engraved in your hearts to teach them.
Because what they receive from their
family, they cannot get anywhere else.
We cannot replace you.
The church is here to assist, but
you are the ones who ultimately need
to raise them with the discipline
of the Lord, and that's it.
So, you have love for
God and to teach them.
If they see the Bible in your
hands, they will surely read it.
If they see you holding a mobile phone
all day, they will be on their phones too.
Don't wait for changes from
the children, you change first.
Because you will shape them into the
people they will be in five, ten years.
That's why God's word is wonderful.
And God is wonderful.
Isn't that right?
Is God good?
And does He love all of us here?
And Sister Ivanka?
But do you love God?
Great.
Shall we pray together now?
You don't have to respond
to every question.
Now you will pray, but
do you know for whom?
For whom should I pray now?
Here, he got it right.
For the parents.
Do you know any prayers for parents?
Not really.
Alright, now we will do it.
Okay?
Calm down.
Because when you pray for them,
they will change towards you.
They will be even better.
They are great now, but
they will be even better.
Okay, dears?
Now each of you pray for your mom and dad.
Okay?
Come on, close your eyes, calm down.
Imagine a picture of your
mom and dad in front of you.
Don't look at me, just close your eyes.
And repeat after me.
Dear God, thank you for the lives
of my mom and dad, thank you.
thank you for taking care of me
you who quickly forgive me
when I make a mistake, please
grant them the spirit of patience
Spirit of love, so they selflessly give to
us, and that we become the best we can be.
Bless me, my mom, dad, brother, sister,
and everyone who takes care of me.
Help me, Jesus, to be the best I can.
Amen.
Was it hard?
See, you can do this every day.
Say it.
Did you ask mom and dad
if you might have one?
I'm joking, I'm joking.
Had enough?
But what, let me just ask you, did
you notice these young people here?
Yes.
What would you say to them?
You can do it, you will succeed.
After this, I can only say amen.